The Long Tail Strategy of IT Outsourcing:  
Building a Supplier Portfolio for Disruption 

(the article is forthcoming in Sloan Management Review, 2015) 

Ning Su 

 
Ivey Business School 
Western University 
 

nsu@ivey.ca 

 

Natalia Levina 

Stern School of Business 

New York University 
nlevina@stern.nyu.edu 

Jeanne Ross 

Sloan School of Management 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

jross@mit.edu 

 
Today’s rapid pace of technological change has fundamentally transformed global IT outsourcing. 
Traditionally viewed as a measure of cost saving, outsourcing is increasingly leveraged as a strategic tool 
for acquiring cutting-edge innovation. Many companies are expanding their portfolios of IT suppliers to 
include smaller, highly innovative companies. This pursuit of emerging technologies and capabilities, 
however, has elevated the complexity of managing supplier portfolios. The outsourcing practices that 
companies have been maturing in the past decade are under a new level of duress. Today organizations 
need to reimagine IT outsourcing strategies in increasingly turbulent business environments. 

The Utopian Portfolio 

Traditionally, companies are advised to optimize their portfolios of IT service providers by 

relying on several major partners with extensive technology and industry experience1, while limiting the 
number of ad-hoc suppliers. To mitigate significant lock-in risk associated with such a portfolio, 
companies are advised to use shorter-term contracts with well-designed incentives. Collectively, this 
limited set of partners could offer a comprehensive and complementary set of capabilities, while the 
competition among partners could motivate them to invest time and resources in the client. By centrally 
managing this “optimized” portfolio, a company could achieve the economies of scale necessary for low 
cost and high efficiency.   

Although this approach to outsourcing was designed to ensure economies of scale and gain 

efficiency2, companies also hoped that their outsourcing partners would introduce innovative technologies 
and associated services3. Few business and IT leaders, however, are satisfied with the level of innovation 
introduced by their suppliers4. Yet today, more than ever, as rapid technological changes disrupt 
industries, established companies need access to fresh ideas, new technologies, and cutting-edge expertise. 
These capabilities are often found among smaller, more agile suppliers5. This is not surprising as the very 
idea behind disruptive innovation is in that many established players tend to ignore disruptive changes to 
their business until newer firms replace their products and services by providing better value to the 
customers 6. In response, savvy business leaders are devising far more proactive outsourcing practices, 
and not just relying on a stable, limited set of partners, for identifying and introducing innovations.  

These proactive practices, however, contradict many companies’ aspirations for consolidating 
their supplier portfolios. Having encountered the pain of managing multiple suppliers in the past, many 
companies, especially those with a well-established sourcing management office, have created policies 

1 

that mandate contracting only with the small group of strategic partners. Yet, even in such firms, business 
unit leaders tend to circumvent policies and engage the services of niche, value-adding suppliers to keep 
up with technological changes critical to their units’ competitiveness. This often results in a large set of 
shadow suppliers working on smaller, fragmented projects, oftentimes under the radar of sourcing 
management offices and enterprise architects. Absent systematic orchestration and proper incentives, 
companies will miss the opportunity to integrate the local innovations of these diverse suppliers into the 
organization.  

The Long Tail Strategy 

In this research we introduce the “long tail” strategy of IT outsourcing as an alternative to the 
dominant practice of concentrating on a few key partners. Representing a dynamic, diversified, and yet 
disciplined approach towards outsourcing, the long tail strategy embraces and even fosters a flow of new 
suppliers, continually bringing in new capabilities that can enable the company to prosper in turbulent 
business environments. This strategy requires a carefully-designed governance framework which rewards 
best-performing suppliers by increasing the client’s commitment while specifying a set of policies and 
architectural requirements for partners. The small set of partners assists the client in operating core 
technologies and business processes, while integrating the local, temporary, or experimental capabilities 
of long-tail suppliers into the firm’s architecture. If orchestrated effectively, this strategy turns into a 
reality the seemingly unattainable goal of introducing innovation while ensuring cost and efficiency.  

Global Bank: Leveraging the Long Tail for Technology Leadership 

Global Bank is one of the largest global financial services companies and has been ranked 

amongst the world’s most innovative investment banks multiple times by financial industry associations. 
Global Bank had a history of pioneering cutting-edge technologies in financial services. For decades, IT 
outsourcing had been considered a strategic tool by the company. As an early adopter of global sourcing, 
the bank embarked on its global sourcing journey in the 1980s. In the decade that followed, Global Bank 
partnered with a small set of major IT service firms in both onshore and offshore locations. These 
suppliers provided IT support and maintenance for the bank’s worldwide business. The bank’s corporate 
policies focused on promoting these key relationships so as to achieve efficiency in operations.  

In the 2000s, however, with the rapid maturation of offshore IT service markets, the bank started 

adding new outsourcing relationships to include suppliers from new regions as well as smaller local 
suppliers offering new capabilities. In addition, through multiple M&As, the bank acquired divisions with 
their own supplier relationships. This diverse portfolio, often including hundreds of suppliers within the 
same service category, allowed the bank to tap into new sources of value and access “best of breed” skills 
and talent across the globe.  At the same time, much redundancy existed among the suppliers and 
significant value was left on the table due to the unrealized economies of scale, scope, and expertise. The 
collective cost of managing transactions with this diversified portfolio of suppliers was also very high.  

As the global supply market matured, the costs of such fragmentation and redundancy became 

increasingly noticeable. This resulted in the decision to strengthen the bank’s global sourcing governance. 
By mid 2000s, the bank started to consolidate smaller contracts into larger partnerships with multinational 
IT firms. However, business unit leaders continued to enter into small-scale contracts with new suppliers, 

2 

justifying their actions by the need for skills and innovation. Instead of banning these practices or looking 
the other way, Global Bank’s sourcing management office started implementing policies that allowed 
local business unit managers to discover and experiment with new suppliers. In this process, two issues 
had to be addressed. The first was how to avoid adding suppliers that did not bring unique capabilities, 
but were rather added to the mix because of the local manager’s personal preferences. The second issue 
was how to motivate new suppliers to invest in relationships with Global Bank when they viewed the 
bank as committed to its existing partners. 

What ensued was the creation of a “long tail” sourcing strategy that leveraged carefully-designed 
organizational practices to combine advantages of accessing the innovative capabilities of niche players 
with the efficiencies offered by major partnerships. To implement this strategy, Global Bank mobilized 
distributed, bottom-up decision-making among its large number of “program managers,” – middle-level 
managers responsible for creating and maintaining IT systems serving particular business functions – 
while using multi-leveled, top-down governance to continually evaluate and consolidate the supplier 
portfolio. Specifically, several initiatives were taken across the organization.  

First, the bank gave its program managers from diverse business units a high level of autonomy in 

supplier selection for smaller projects. In search of capability and cost advantage, these program 
managers experimented with hundreds of different niche players:  

“We let people make relationships with whomever they wanted; do small projects 
offshore so that people see that it works and then encourage them to do bigger projects.” 

Second, the bank incentivized the program managers to develop their own “best-of-breed” 

suppliers by helping suppliers acquire valuable knowledge of financial industry, facilitating suppliers’ 
market competitiveness and likelihood of winning further business from Global Bank. These “groomed” 
suppliers viewed Global Bank as a strategic client and were willing to invest in the relationship without 
being promised a long-term commitment. Such mutual investment had created strategic value for both 
Global Bank and its suppliers.  

For example, in one business unit, managers spent significant time educating their new suppliers 

about the bank’s workflows in risk management. Such teaching enabled the supplier to rapidly create a 
series of highly successful software applications supporting this business function. Both the program 
managers and the supplier recognized that these new applications could be offered to other clients in 
financial services industry as they automated standard industry processes. Legal agreements were 
negotiated on how the supplier could sell these new software “assets” and related services while 
rewarding Global Bank’ for their intellectual property (IP).  

In a similar mode, an award-winning Customer Relationship Management system was developed 

in partnership with another supplier, although Global Bank decided to keep IP rights. One of the 
supplier’s senior managers explained the bank’s mode of working with new suppliers:  

“[At Global Bank] there is willingness to experiment with new types of partnerships… 
They have also shown us a significant commitment. They have shown us tremendous 

3 

willingness to educate us about how a bank works… We have shown a lot of commitment 
to [Global Bank] in terms of making investment in people and time.” 

The final piece of this new approach was that program managers evangelized their success stories 
across the organization, promoting “their” successful suppliers among other business units. Through this 
distributed decision-making process, a portfolio of preferred suppliers emerged. The portfolio was 
regularly evaluated by the bank’s sourcing management office, which identified the top-performing 
suppliers across the firm. The top suppliers were then shortlisted in subsequent contracts. Over the years, 
some of these “new” suppliers were promoted to the list of key strategic partners. This set of strategic 
partners still accounted for the majority of Global Bank’s IT outsourcing activities.  

This distributed internal “championing” process enabled Global Bank to foster and proactively 

manage an influx of diverse suppliers with unique value propositions. Instead of seeking a static portfolio 
with an “optimal” number of limited suppliers, the long tail of suppliers continually brought in disruptive 
capabilities and technologies. The diversified portfolio also helped hedge the risk of lock-in with strategic 
partners. The long tail strategy, however, incurred significant total cost of coordinating a large set of 
suppliers7, 8. This cost was somewhat mitigated by the multilevel decision-making process, in which the 
sourcing management office not only managed the core group of strategic partnerships, but also provided 
support for contracting with new suppliers. 

As a result of the long tail strategy, Global Bank was able to rapidly tap into nascent supply 

markets in the early 2000s, obtaining a first mover advantage in the global race for capability and talent. 
As digital disruption became the key concern in the last decade, the long tail strategy enabled Global 
Bank to proactively scan and experiment with new technology offerings from smaller agile suppliers, 
allowing it to emerge as an industry leader of digital innovations such as enterprise social media, cloud 
computing, mobile technologies, and crowdsourcing. Today, Global Bank continues relying on the long 
tail strategy to stay at the cutting edge of global technological innovation. 

Toyota North America: Leveraging the Long Tail for Rapid Innovation 

The long tail strategy can help multinationals tap into the latest technologies, but in order to do so 

more rapidly than the competition, this strategy requires strong technology architectural capability. 
Toyota North America has outsourced 80% of its IT workforce, which has enabled the company to cut 
information systems support costs9. Several strategic partnerships are critical for maintaining commodity 
technologies and implementing incremental improvements. However, Toyota’s management recognized 
that, while their core partners consistently provided efficient infrastructure services and legacy systems 
support, the company also wanted to leverage emerging technologies — often based in the public cloud 
— to offer new dealer and consumer services. Thus, management looked to smaller, more agile suppliers 
to address their pressing need for innovation, especially in customer-facings areas. The Consumer Portal 
Delivery (CPD) group at Toyota was responsible for the consumer-facing web portal — a “big ecosystem” 
accommodating the entire consumer experience of users with diverse digital devices. CPD’s unique 
technology requirements led to new kinds of supplier arrangements for Toyota, namely, working on oneoff projects with nascent start-ups instead of long-term engagements with major partners:  

4 

“[CPD] needs vendors that can build very quickly, and then tear it down the next day. 
And we are dealing with smaller shops. When you were first able to spin a car graphic, 
there were only a couple of shops that could do it, and most of those guys were working 
out of their garage.” – Zack Hicks, Chief Information Officer 

Such sourcing arrangements have demanded new governance approaches, because integrating the 

services of these small suppliers into a seamless customer experience requires access to enterprise data. 
Toyota created an architecture team that defined key business capabilities, and both technology and data 
standards. By adhering to architecture standards, smaller suppliers can now build new functions and 
applications that are integrated with Toyota’s core infrastructure and data. The shared technology and 
data platforms not only offer a wider range of partnerships, they also accelerate CPD’s time to market.  

“I have invested in supporting [the CPD web portal]’s team. In the past their sites used 
to replicate customer and vehicle data, but now [CPD] uses the same services, back-end 
systems, and customer database.” – Jayadev Gopinath, Head of the IT architecture group 

Toyota is part of a complex ecosystem that includes numerous dealerships ranging from small, 

rural, family-owned locations, to major metropolitan, multi-location, mega-dealerships. Management 
feels it is important to enable dealerships to create their own applications and websites suited to their local 
needs and budgetary constraints. To facilitate this local flexibility, Toyota’s IT organization has worked 
with the National Dealership Council to vet and finalize a list of 19 web development providers from 
which individual dealerships can choose. All 19 providers take advantage of Toyota’s standardized access 
portal to its centralized customer database when developing websites and applications for local 
dealerships.  

Like Global Bank, Toyota North America leverages the long tail strategy to ensure efficiency 
while facilitating localized innovations. The core partners deliver reliable services and constitute the 
majority of Toyota’s IT outsourcing spend. In contrast, the smaller innovative niche players allow Toyota 
to experiment with new technology trends, and, more importantly, to accommodate the diverse local 
needs of its dealership network. These smaller suppliers leverage the technology and data platforms that 
core providers build and manage. In most cases, they do not aspire to become big strategic partners. 
Rather, the long-term payback is often in the ability to generate new relationships with similar companies. 
Toyota’s two types of supplier must work together, but they bring different strengths to the table, which, 
combined, make Toyota more efficient, reliable, and agile.  

Leveraging the Long Tail 

As evidenced in the experience of Global Bank and Toyota North America, deriving strategic 

value from the supplier portfolio requires a methodical approach for managing the diverse and dynamic 
set of outsourcing relationships. With each strategic partner in the portfolio, the client should continue 
investing time and resources in order to reach long-term goals of these relationships. The close tie 
between the client firm and its key partners enables and motivates these partners to develop knowledge 
and processes specific to the client so as to deliver greater value. Meanwhile, the client also should foster 
some healthy competition among key partners by engaging suppliers with both complementary and 
substitutable capabilities. The long tail part of the portfolio, in contrast, has a different objective. It 

5 

enables the client to acquire emerging technologies and capabilities in an agile fashion. In order to 
identify new suppliers as well as manage the complexity and costs associated with the long tail, 
companies need to build a special set of sourcing practices that institutionalizes both centralized and 
decentralized decision making when it comes to discovering, nurturing, incentivizing, controlling, and 
integrating relationships with multiple suppliers. Through interviews with 150 managers from 30 major 
multinational corporations, we have identified five such best practices for leveraging the long tail 
approach to IT outsourcing. 

Distribute responsibility for technology scanning. The design and evolution of the portfolio, to 

a large extent, relies on an emergent, bottom-up process. This process is driven by the distributed 
decision-making of middle and senior managers who have the best understanding of their business and 
technological needs. These managers should therefore take on an entrepreneurial role, proactively 
scanning for new technologies and leaving the door open for suppliers, both existing and new, to pitch 
innovative solutions to them These local managers are in the best position to tell apart latest fads from 
potentially valuable innovations. Based on their analysis of promising technologies, they can start 
identifying who is in the best position to help them further probe new opportunities through 
experimentation – internal IT, incumbent partners, or new suppliers? The sourcing management office 
should introduce informal and formal communication channels so that managers across diverse business 
units can recommend new technologies and suppliers to their peers.  

For example, a major European insurance company historically relied on about a dozen major IT 

services suppliers worldwide. Even with this relatively large number of partners, it still had to venture 
into proactive search and engagement with newer niche suppliers to keep up with the digital disruption. 
The sourcing director explained how the company was always prepared to open up its portfolio:  

“We have a very, very close look at what’s on the market and how the market reacts… 
The whole notion of having big vendors in big rooms can be turned upside down… We 
had a parallel [internal] development, which now we are discussing to stop because [the 
niche new supplier] is on the highway on the left lane and just bypassing us… They are 
just moving much faster than we can. So why don’t we jump on their train?”  

Nurture relationships at the tail-end. One pitfall of the long tail strategy is that it demotivates 
new suppliers from investing in client relationships. Indeed, each supplier in the long tail may feel that 
their role is temporary and focus their best efforts on other clients willing to make long-term 
commitments. It is thus important that both business unit managers and the sourcing management office 
incentivize suppliers to invest in the relationship. Top-down incentives are clear: if experimental projects 
show positive results, the supplier will get internal referrals and potentially make its way into the mix of 
strategic partners. This was the case, for example, with cloud computing providers, who often started as 
niche players, but have moved into the partnership roles as cloud technologies became more prominent. 
The bottom-up nurturing requires more creativity and relationship management skills. Business unit 
managers cannot always promise long-term commitment, but can design more creative incentives such as 
invitations to work on innovative projects, strategic learning opportunities about the client’s industry, 
willingness to serve as a reference, and even financial investments in the suppliers. It is important for 
managers to realize that the viability of outsourcing relationships often lies in the alignment between the 
client’s IT sourcing strategies and the supplier’s long-term growth strategies.  

6 

A large U.S. financial services company, for example, had been relying on a concentrated 

portfolio of a handful of strategic partners. Yet, over the years it also developed several relationships with 
other suppliers mostly for cost saving reasons. Gradually, the client discovered the significant potential of 
some of these suppliers and allowed them to work on more innovative projects. Leveraging these projects 
as incentives, the company achieved significant success in outsourcing:  

“You always want to be… a customer of choice. And to be the customer of choice, you 
want to have the kind of partnership where you are making your supplier work on some 
of your most innovative activity. And if you do that consistently and honestly, the 
suppliers will give the most talented resources.” 

Encourage sales pitches from your suppliers. Capitalizing on the suppliers’ investment in the 

outsourcing relationships, the client’s program managers should encourage the suppliers to actively 
propose innovative services. Suppliers’ technology capabilities, coupled with knowledge acquired from 
the clients, can become a driver of value creation. Yet clients often express disappointment with their 
existing suppliers’ innovativeness4. A key idea of the long tail strategy is to stimulate innovation by 
inviting both existing and new suppliers to propose new services and win new business. While client’s 
managers sometimes institute policies precluding proactive sales pitches from current suppliers, inviting 
these proposals is an effective way of learning about innovative technologies and service offerings.   

As an example, the global technology company EMC successfully leveraged suppliers to 

introduce innovations, ranging from new business processes to emerging technologies. During supplier 
evaluation and contract renewal, the firm emphasized innovative capacity as an important differentiator. 

“They (suppliers) have got to demonstrate that they are bringing something different to 
the table that is strategic to EMC. I always say to them, they’ve got to make me a hero… 
So they came to the table, and they actually proactively suggested ways to change the 
process, and some changes to the technology platform, and then we have a mobile app.”   

Govern your entire outsourcing portfolio. The portfolio of suppliers emerging from the 

distributed decision process needs to be effectively orchestrated at the enterprise level. The critical role of 
governance is to distinguish between the company’s core processes, which long-term strategic partners 
can manage for efficiency, security, and scale, from  temporary, experimental, local processes that local 
business or IT managers can outsource to niche suppliers. This distinction will clarify accountability for 
sourcing decisions. 

Governance must also specify standard, repeatable processes for due diligence, contracting, and 
performance measurement. In addition, governance is needed to periodically rationalize the portfolio to 
increase the client’s commitment to the top-performing players while ensuring competition. This 
rationalization requires a deep understanding of value drivers of different types of outsourcing services7. 
It requires asking questions like: Does this service benefit more from scale and scope economies or best 
of breed approaches?  Would using a one-off niche supplier for this service create significant risk of lockin without proper control mechanisms? Is this a business critical process that requires significant 
redundancy with at least two suppliers that can substitute for each other?   

7 

Large corporations with complex outsourcing portfolios will need a dedicated outsourcing 

governance office that works together with business unit managers to understand value drivers for each 
service, institute proper controls, and support specific relationships. For example, a multinational 
financial services company has been recognized as one of the best private banks in the world. The bank 
invested in establishing a centralized governance organization responsible for designing the company’s 
overall outsourcing model, supervising a small number of major partnerships, and collaborating with 
business units to coordinate relationships with diverse long-tail suppliers. Under the management of the 
governance office, local business units still had the flexibility to select best-fitting capabilities:  

“The choices about who the strategic vendors are and where they have a right to play as 
well as what top-down targets we’d like to see over time, about how much of a footprint 
is done with these vendors, those decisions are pretty centralized. The selection and the 
execution of individual deals is pretty decentralized within that framework.”  

Architect for integration. With diverse suppliers delivering specialized services, the long tail 

strategy places significant emphasis on the client’s integration capability. At the core of this capability are 
investments made into a strong technical architecture, shared data sources, and common standards, which 
enables the client to develop a holistic and detailed view of different processes within the organization. 
This in turn should allow the local business unit managers, the centralized IT staff, and the sourcing 
management office to make better decisions about when to allow for a local niche solution and when to 
demand a top-down engagement. Architectural investments that build capabilities for integration are 
expensive, but they save time and money when a company attempts to extend its capabilities with a new 
technology.  

As an example, an Asia-Pacific-based multinational financial services company increasingly 
embraced the long tail strategy. Through effective outsourcing, the company reduced costs, improved 
service levels, and invested in collaborative innovation with suppliers. In recent years, the bank received a 
number of global financial industry awards for their technological innovation, and emerged as an industry 
leader in technology. The bank emphasized the importance of retaining and investing in architectural 
capability as it moved toward a more diversified and dynamic outsourcing environment: 

“[The bank] retains the architectural oversight. [The bank] has a keen interest in 
insuring that we have broad design authority... We took (the business) up into a multisource environment... We retain the high level engineering capability and the service 
integration role. And that’s quite deliberate.” 

Changing the Outsourcing Culture 

The above five practices are key to the success of leveraging the long tail strategy for managing 
IT supplier portfolios. While outsourcing researchers and advisors have pointed out the pitfalls of using 
only “megadeals” and the need for expanding to some form of “multisourcing,” we propose that in the 
time of rapid technological change, relying on a limited number of suppliers, no matter how diversified, is 
insufficient. Meanwhile, everything business leaders have learned about the risks of too many suppliers is 
still relevant.  

8 

The very nature of disruptive innovation is such that new players replace incumbent firms. IT 
service suppliers are no exception. Some of the forward thinking suppliers are themselves proactively 
engaging niche technology players in open innovation projects to boost their firm’s innovativeness11, but 
it often takes a long time for their customers to see the results of such open innovation strategies. 
Meanwhile, their clients can derive great value from establishing a more dynamic, diversified, yet still 
disciplined approach to creating and managing external relationships. By synergistically combining 
bottom-up portfolio design with top-down portfolio governance, the long-tail strategy should allow 
companies to maintain their focus on cost and efficiency while still discovering new sources of value and 
innovation in today’s turbulent business environment12.  

The implementation of this strategy is not easy and will be particularly uncomfortable for firms 

that are used to centralized governance of their IT resources. It requires continuously nurturing key 
partner relationships while still facilitating the emergence of new value-adding relationships that may 
eventually disrupt some of the key partnerships. Meanwhile, it requires significant investment into shared 
practices and architectural capabilities so as to provide proper incentives to a diverse set of players, 
reduce coordination and contracting costs, and enable integration of services. Thus, implementing this 
strategy requires three changes in companies’ outsourcing culture: from reactive problem-solving 
thinking to proactive, entrepreneurial thinking; from focus on cost to focus on value created through 
external innovative capabilities; and from a stable set of partnerships to a dynamic set of relationships. If 
well executed, the long tail strategy can transform IT outsourcing into a driver of innovation and value 
creation in the age of digital disruption. 

About the Research 

We have been studying portfolio strategies for IT outsourcing since 2005. The main objective of 
the research program is to understand the changing nature of IT services in today’s increasingly digitized 
and globalized business environment. We have conducted 150 interviews with 30 companies, including 
15 clients, mostly Fortune Global 500 companies, and 15 major suppliers. The 30 companies are based in 
North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Latin America, Russia, Japan, India, and China, and 
spanning financial services, business services, technology, manufacturing, and energy sectors. The 
financial services industry, as a pioneer of global IT outsourcing, represents a main context of the study.  

References 

1 F.W. McFarlan and R.L. Nolan, “How to Manage an IT Outsourcing Alliance,” MIT Sloan Management 
Review 36, no. 2 (winter 1995): 9-24. 

2 M.C. Lacity, L.P. Willcocks and D.F. Feeny, “IT Outsourcing: Maximize Flexibility and Control,” 
Harvard Business Review 73, no. 3 (May-June 1995): 84-93. 

3 N. Levina and N. Su, “Global Multisourcing Strategy: The Emergence of a Supplier Portfolio in 
Services Offshoring,” Decision Sciences 39, no. 3 (August 2008): 541-570. 

4 D. Brown and P. Fersht, “Executive Report: The State of Services and Outsourcing in 2014,” September 
19, 2014, http://www.kpmg-institutes.com/. 

9 

5 D. Fogarty and P.C. Bell, “Should You Outsource Analytics?” MIT Sloan Management Review 55, no. 
2 (winter 2014): 41-45. 

6 C. M. Christensen, “The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail,” 
(Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1997). 

7 N. Su and N. Levina, “Global Multisourcing Strategy: Integrating Learning From Manufacturing into IT 
Service Outsourcing,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 58, no. 4 (November 2011): 717729. 

8 M. Wiener and C. Saunders, “Forced Coopetition in IT Multi-sourcing,” Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems 23 (2014): 210-225. 

9 P. Betancourt, J. Mooney, and J. Ross, “Digital Innovation at Toyota Motor Sales North America: 
Revamping the Role of IT,” MIT CISR Working Paper No. 402 (May 2015). 

10 P. Weill and J. Ross, “IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision Rights for Superior 
Results,” 1st ed. (Harvard Business School Press, 2004). 

11 H. Chesbrough “Why Companies Should Have Open Business Models,” MIT Sloan Management 
Review 48, no. 2 (winter 2007): 22-28. 

12 S. Kaplan and W. Orlikowski, “Beyond Forecasting: Creating New Strategic Narratives,” MIT Sloan 
Management Review 56, no. 1 (fall 2014): 23-28. 

 

10 

